"lt is in answer to this aggression from the inside -in other words, against instinct- that the different defensive procedures are instigated. The 'Project for a Scientific Psychology' (1950a [1895]) tackles the problem of defence in two ways:

a. Freud seeks the origin of what he calls 'primary defence' in an 'experience of pain', just as he had found the model of desire and its inhibition by the ego in an 'experience of satisfaction'. This conception, however, is not expounded with the same clarity, in the 'Project' itself, as that of the experience of satisfaction (oc).

b. Freud attempts to differentiate a pathological form of defence from a normal form. The latter occurs in the case of the revival of a distressing experience; in normal defence, the ego must have been able to begin inhibiting the unpleasure on the occasion of the initial experience by means of 'side-cathexes': 'If the cathexis of the memory is repeated, the unpleasure is repeated too, but the ego-facilitations are there already as well; experience shows that the release [of unpleasure] is less the second time, until, after further repetition, it shrivels up to the intensity of a signal acceptable to the ego' (la).

This kind of defence enables the ego to avoid the danger of being over- whelmed and infiltrated by the primary process; in pathological defence, on the other hand, this is precisely what does happen. As we know, Freud considers that this latter operation only cornes into play as a consequence of a sexual scene which, at the time, did not give rise to normal defence but whose memory, once reactivated, triggers off a rise in excitation from the inside. 'Attention is [normally] adjusted towards perceptions, which are what ordinarily give occasion for a release of unpleasure. Here [however, what has appeared] is no perception but a memory, which unexpectedly releases unpleasure, and the ego only discovers this too late' (lb). Which explains 'the fact that in the case of an ego-process consequences follow to which we are accustomed only with primary processes' (le)."

~ Laplanche, Pontalis. The language of psychoanalysis
